                                                    Glossary
Account: Detailed classification established to budget and account for the purchase of specific goods and services and
the receipt of revenues from specific sources; also known as line item.
Accrual Basis of Accounting: Under the accrual basis of accounting, revenues are recognized when service is delivered
and expenses are recognized when the benefit is received. All County proprietary funds use the accrual basis of
accounting.
Activity: A specific and distinguishable line of work performed within a program; the most basic component of service
delivery for each County agency and its budget.
Adopted Budget: The initial budget for the fiscal year approved by the Board of County Supervisors as a result of
the annual budget process. Adopted differs from appropriated in the budget document’s financial summaries in that
appropriated includes all budget revisions subsequent to the initial adopted budget such as off-cycle budget adjustments,
budget transfers, and prior year appropriations.
Agency: A separate organizational unit of County government established to deliver services to citizens.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report: Annual financial statements comprising the financial report of Prince William
County and its component units required by the Code of Virginia in conformity with Generally Accepted Accounting
Principles.
Appropriation: An amount of money in the budget, authorized by the Board of County Supervisors, for expenditure by
departments for specific purposes. For example, general fund appropriations are for operating and general purposes
while Capital Improvement Project Fund appropriations are for major improvements such as roads and public facilities.
Assess: To place a value on property for tax purposes.
Assessed Valuation: The value of property within the boundaries of Prince William County for purposes of taxation.
Assets: Resources owned or held by Prince William County that have monetary value.
Assigned Fund Balance: Amounts that are constrained by the government’s intent to be used for specific purposes but
are neither restricted nor committed.
Audit: To examine (accounts, records, etc.) for purposes of verification, appropriateness, risk, and/or efficiency.
Auditor of Public Accounts: A state agency that oversees accounting, financial reporting, and audit requirements for
units of local government in the state of Virginia.
Balanced Budget: A budget that has its funding sources (revenues plus other resources) equal to its funding uses
(expenditures plus other allocations). All local governments in Virginia must adopt a balanced budget as a requirement of
state law.
Base Budget: The same level of agency funding as in the current year adopted budget with adjustments for: one-time
costs; agency revenue reductions; current fiscal year merit pay roll-forward adjustments; current year personnel actions;
benefit cost changes; full year funding for partial year funded positions approved for the current fiscal year; approved
budget shifts; Board of County Supervisors’ actions approved during the current fiscal year; and any related outcome and
service level target revisions.
Base Budget Review: A process that evaluates departmental base budgets in order to determine if an activity should
continue to be funded at the current level.
Board Audit Committee (BAC): A committee of the Board of County Supervisors, supported by the internal audit
function, established to assist in governance and oversight responsibilities. All Board of County Supervisors members
comprise the BAC, which consists of three regular voting members and five alternate members. The internal audit
function reports directly to the Board of County Supervisors, through the BAC.
Bond Rating: The rating of bonds is a statement of a locality’s economic, financial, and managerial condition. It represents
the business community’s assessment of the investment quality of a local government. Highly rated bonds attract more
competition in the marketplace, thereby lowering interest costs paid by the County government and its taxpayers.
Bonds: Instruments used to borrow money for the debt financing of long-term capital improvements.
Budget: An itemized allotment of revenues and expenditures for a specific time period, tied to specific activities.
Budget Amendment: Any change to the adopted budget where funds are added or subtracted through Board of County
Supervisors action by a resolution that occurs throughout the course of the fiscal year as needed for County government
operations.
Budget Authority: Ability to enter transactions that will result in the receipt or disbursement of County funds.




Proposed FY2027 Budget                                       476                                                      Appendix
                                                   Glossary
Budget Initiatives: Changes to the base budget recommended by the County Executive as part of the proposed budget.
Supplemental budget increases and decreases approved by the Board of County Supervisors are shown as Budget
Initiatives in the agency detail section of the (Adopted) Budget document.
Budget Transfers: Budget transfers shift previously budgeted funds from one line item of expenditure to another.
Transfers may occur throughout the course of the fiscal year as needed for County government operations and are
governed by the budget transfer policy.
Budgeted Agency Savings: A budgeted reduction added to agency budgets due to expected operational savings during
the fiscal year. This is similar to budgeted salary lapse.
Budgeted Salary Lapse: A budgeted reduction in estimated salary and fringe benefit expenditures due to estimated
position vacancy savings anticipated for the fiscal year.
Business Professional and Occupational License Tax: A tax that is levied upon the privilege of doing business or
engaging in a profession, trade, or occupation in the County. The tax base includes all phases of the business, profession,
trade, or occupation, whether or not conducted in the County.
Capital Expenditures: Expenditures incurred for the acquisition or construction of major capital assets (e.g., land, roads,
buildings).
Capital Improvement Program (CIP): The County’s Six-Year Plan that identifies facility and infrastructure projects,
outlines project schedules, and provides project cost estimates. The County’s CIP utilizes a variety of federal, state and
local funding sources, and is guided by Board of County Supervisors policies, the Strategic Plan, and the Comprehensive
Plan.
Capital Projects Fund: This fund is used to account for financial resources used for the acquisition or construction of
major capital facilities (other than those financed by Proprietary Fund Types). The Capital Projects Fund accounts for
construction projects including improvements to schools, roads, and other projects.
Catchment: An area served by a hospital or social service agency.
Committed Fund Balance: Amounts that can only be used for specific purposes pursuant to constraints imposed by
formal action of the government’s highest level of decision-making authority.
Community Outcomes: Key outcomes with targets that demonstrate how the community or individual will benefit
or change based on achieving the goal. Community outcomes are adopted by the Board of County Supervisors in the
Strategic Plan, taken from the biennial community survey results, or developed by agencies based on their mission and
goals.
Community Partner: A non-profit 501(c)3 organization that provides specific services and programs to the residents
of Prince William County. Grant funding is directed through the Strategic and Annual Competitive Community Partners
Program.
Component Unit: An element of the Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (ACFR) that identifies affiliated organizations
for which financial activity must be reported separately. For example, the Adult Detention Center and Schools are
component units in the Prince William County ACFR.
Comprehensive Plan: State mandated plan that guides the coordinated, adjusted, and harmonious land development
that best promotes the health, safety, and general welfare of County citizens. It contains long-range recommendations for
land use, transportation systems, community services, historic resources, environmental resources, and other facilities,
services, and resources.
Comprehensive Services Act (for At-Risk Youth and Families): The state law governing the funding and provision of
services to youth and families who require foster care or special education services, or who are involved with the Juvenile
& Domestic Relations Court.
Contingency: Contingency is an amount of funding maintained in the general fund to cover unanticipated expenditures
and/or shortfalls in revenues collected. The Board of County Supervisors must authorize any use of the Contingency.
Co-Op Budget: The state-administered budget for the Public Health District that is comprised of funding from the state,
County, and cities of Manassas and Manassas Park, as well as fees for services, federal funding, and private sector grants.
Cost Recovery: A cost recovery budget is used when a particular group of expenditures (largely personnel) is charged
back to user agencies or to capital projects. When a cost recovery budget is set up, a negative expenditure budget amount
is established equal to the positive expenditure budget amount, resulting in a net expenditure budget of zero.
Council of Governments: A regional organization of units of local government in the Washington, D.C. metropolitan
area.




Proposed FY2027 Budget                                      477                                                   Appendix
                                                     Glossary
Crisis Receiving Center: A County facility that provides treatment services for those experiencing mental health and
substance use crises.
Debt: An obligation resulting from the borrowing of money.
Debt Service: Payment of interest and principal amounts on loans to the County such as bonds.
Depreciation: The process of allocating the cost of a capital asset to the periods during which the asset is used.
Directives: Board of County Supervisors’ requests, made during Supervisors Time at a Board of County Supervisors
meeting, for County staff to provide information and/or take action.
Effectiveness: A measurable relationship of resources required to achieve intended results.
Efficiency: A measurable relationship of resources required to produce goods and services, such as cost per unit of
service.
Electronic Monitoring: A system that uses technology and staff supervision to detain persons in their homes in lieu of
incarceration in a secure facility.
Employee Benefits: Services and opportunities afforded employees because they work for Prince William County.
These benefits include medical and dental insurance, health insurance credit program, flexible benefit account program,
Virginia Retirement System, 401(a) money purchase plan, 457 deferred compensation plan, supplemental police and fire
retirement plan, group life insurance, optional life insurance, long-term care insurance, employee assistance program,
short and long-term disability, holiday leave, sick, personal, and annual leave, sick leave bank, other leave, credit union,
direct deposit, employee advisory committee, and grievance procedure.
Encumbrances: Obligations incurred in the form of purchase orders, contracts, and similar items that will become
payable when goods are delivered, or services rendered.
Enterprise Funds: These funds are used to account for operations (a) that are financed and operated in a manner similar
to private business enterprises where the intent of the Board of County Supervisors is that the costs (expenses, including
depreciation) of providing goods or services to the general public on a continuing basis be financed or recovered primarily
through user charges, (b) where the Board of County Supervisors has decided that periodic determination of revenues
earned, expenses incurred, and/or net income is appropriate for capital maintenance, public policy, management control,
accountability, or other purposes. The following are Enterprise Funds: Prince William County Parks & Recreation (which
provides recreational services), the Prince William County Landfill (which provides solid waste disposal services), and
Innovation Park which is County owned land being marketed for re-sale to targeted industries.
Exemption: A grant of immunity from a specific program, policy, or action.
Expenditure: An amount of money disbursed for the purchase of goods and services. Externally imposed by creditors
(such as through debt covenants), grantors, contributors, or laws or regulations of other governments.
Family Access to Medical Insurance Security: The state’s health insurance program for uninsured and underinsured
citizens.
Family Assessment and Planning Team: A group of community representatives, including human services professionals
and parents, who develop service plans for at-risk youth and families.
Farm-Outs: Inmates incarcerated at other local and regional jails because of a lack of bed space at the Adult Detention
Center.
Fill Rate: The percentage of resource requests the library is able to fulfill to satisfy patron information needs.
Fiscal Year: The time frame to which the budget applies. Prince William County’s fiscal year begins on July 1 and ends on
June 30.
Five-Year Plan: The County’s projected expenditures and revenues for the next five fiscal years beginning with the
adopted budget fiscal year. The Board of County Supervisors adopts the Five-Year Plan each year in concert with the
adopted budget. The first year of each Five-Year Plan is synonymous with the adopted budget.
Full-Time Equivalent (FTE): A unit identifying the workload of an employee which is calculated by taking an employee’s
scheduled hours divided by the employer’s hours for a full-time workweek. An FTE of 1.00 is equivalent to a full-time
employee.
Fund: A financial entity to account for money or other resources, such as taxes, charges, and fees, established for
conducting specified operations for attaining certain objectives, frequently under specific limitations.
Fund Balance: The difference between assets and liabilities in a governmental fund.




Proposed FY2027 Budget                                        478                                                    Appendix
                                                     Glossary
Fund Balance Components: The classifications that segregate fund balance by constraints on purposes for which
amounts can be spent. There are five classifications: Non-spendable Fund Balance, Restricted Fund Balance, Committed
Fund Balance, Assigned Fund Balance, and Unassigned Fund Balance.
Fund Balance Reserve: The sum total of reservations placed against a fund balance for encumbrances, future year
designations, and other purposes including grants and special projects, non-current receivables, inventory, and debt
service reserves.
General Fund: Fund used to account for all financial transactions and resources except those required to be accounted
for in another fund. Revenues are derived primarily from property and other local taxes, state and federal distributions,
licenses, permits, charges for services, and interest income. A significant part of the general fund’s revenues is transferred
to other funds to finance the operations of the County Public Schools and the Regional Adult Detention Center.
General Obligation Bond: A municipal bond secured by the taxing and borrowing power of the municipality issuing it.
Goal: General statements of public policy, purpose, and intent.
Governmental Fund Types: Most of the County’s governmental functions are accounted for in Governmental Funds.
These funds measure changes in financial position, rather than net income. Governmental fund types include the General
Fund, Special Revenue Funds, and the Capital Projects Fund.
Grant: A payment by one entity to another entity, or a foundation to a non-profit organization intended to support a
specified function such as health care, housing, street repair, or construction. Governmental units, foundations, nonprofit
organizations, and individuals can all award grants and/or be awarded grants.
Homeless Prevention Center: A County owned homeless shelter.
Host Agency: A department or agency that manages the relationship between a community organization and the County
to include proposed donation levels and budget, performance measures, and financial reporting; also, a department
that supports, through internal services, any of the business application activities in the Department of Information
Technology. Imposed by law through constitutional provisions or enabling legislation.
Institutional Network: A state-of-the-art communications network for County government, police, fire, library, and
school facilities.
Internal Service Funds: Funds used to account for goods or services provided by one department or agency to other
departments or agencies of the County, or to other governments, on an allocated cost recovery basis. Internal Service
Funds have been established for information technology, vehicle maintenance, road construction, and self-insurance.
Interstate Highway 66: Runs across the western end of the County.
Interstate Highway 95: Runs across the eastern end of the County.
Invitation for Bid (IFB): A formal invitation document that is released to the public requesting bids for defined goods
and services needed by a public body, to be provided in accordance with provisions defined in the IFB. This method
of procurement is used when the requirements can be clearly defined, negotiations are not necessary, price is the
major determining factor for award selection, and where required by law. An award is made to the responsible bidder
submitting the lowest responsive bid.
Liabilities: Obligations incurred in past or current transactions requiring present or future settlement.
License and Permit Fees: Fees paid by citizens or businesses in exchange for legal permission to engage in specific
activities. Examples include building permits and swimming pool licenses.
Line Item: Detailed classification established to budget and account for the purchase of specific goods and services and
the receipt of revenues from specific sources; also known as object level.
Line of Duty Act (LODA): The Virginia Retirement System LODA is established by Section 9.1-400 of the Virginia Code.
LODA provides benefits to public safety-first responders and their survivors who lose their life or become disabled in the
line of duty.
Local Match: County cash or in-kind resources required to be expended simultaneously with state, federal, other locality,
or private sector funding, usually according to a minimum percentage or ratio.
Mandate: A state or federal action that places a requirement on local governments.
Memorandum of Understanding: A written agreement between the County and a community partner specifying the
amount and type of County donations provided and the services and outcomes accounted for by the community partner.
Mission Statement: A brief description of the purpose and functions of an agency.




Proposed FY2027 Budget                                        479                                                   Appendix
                                                   Glossary
Modified Accrual: Under the modified accrual basis of accounting, revenues are recognized when measurable and
available as current assets. Expenditures are generally recognized when the related services or goods are received, and
the liability is incurred. All County governmental and fiduciary funds use the modified accrual basis of accounting.
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) Permit: Discharges from MS4 are regulated under the Virginia
Stormwater Management Act, the Virginia Stormwater Management Program Permit regulations, and the Clean Water Act
as point source discharges. Stormwater discharges from Phase I (large and medium) MS4 are authorized under individual
permits. Under these permits, the MS4 owner/operator must implement a collective series of programs to reduce the
discharge of pollutants from the given storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable in a manner that protects
the water quality of nearby streams, rivers, wetlands, and bays.
Non-Departmental: Budgeted funds not directly associated with, or controlled by, a specific County department.
Non-Spendable Fund Balance: Amounts that cannot be spent because they are either (a) not in spendable form or (b)
legally or contractually required to be maintained intact.
Northern Virginia Regional Commission (formerly Northern Virginia Planning District Commission): A regional
organization comprised of units of local government in the Northern Virginia area.
Northern Virginia Transportation Authority (NVTA): The NVTA is a regional governmental entity established to plan,
prioritize, and fund regional transportation programs. The NVTA covers Arlington, Fairfax, Loudoun, and Prince William
counties and the cities of Alexandria, Fairfax, Falls Church, Manassas, and Manassas Park.
Northern Virginia Transportation Commission (NVTC): A multi-jurisdictional agency representing Arlington, Fairfax,
and Loudoun Counties and the Cities of Alexandria, Fairfax, and Falls Church. NVTC provides a policy forum and allocates
up to $200 million in state, regional, and federal transit assistance each year among its member jurisdictions. NVTC also
appoints one principal and two alternate members to the Board of Directors of The Washington Metropolitan Area Transit
Authority.
Obligation: A future expenditure requirement incurred by voluntary agreement or legal action.
Off-Cycle: A term that characterizes budget adjustments approved by the Board of County Supervisors outside of the
annual budget process.
OmniRide Express: Operated by the Potomac and Rappahannock Transportation Commission, OmniRide Express
provides commuter bus service from eastern Prince William County and the Manassas area to points in Northern Virginia
and the District of Columbia.
OmniRide Local: Operated by the Potomac and Rappahannock Transportation Commission, OmniRide Local provides
local bus service to the communities of Dale City, Dumfries (including Quantico), Manassas/Manassas Park, and
Woodbridge/Lake Ridge.
Ordinance: A law or regulation enacted by the Board of County Supervisors.
Outcome Trends: Multi-year trend information for community and program outcome measures.
Output: Unit of goods or services produced by an agency activity.
Paratransit: Transit service provided by public transit agencies to people with disabilities who cannot use fixed route bus
service because of a disability. In general, the American with Disabilities Act requires complementary paratransit service
must be provided within ¾ of a mile of a bus route, at the same hours and days as fixed route service, for no more than
twice the regular fixed route fare.
Performance Audit: An independent review of a program, activity, function, operation, management system, or
procedure of a government to assess whether the government is achieving economy, efficiency, and effectiveness in
the employment of available resources. The examination is objective and systematic, generally using structured and
professionally adopted methodologies.
Performance Measures: Quantitative characterization of an agency’s success in achieving its stated mission.
Personal Property: An item of property other than real estate to include personal effects, moveable property, goods,
and chattel.
Policy: A definite course or method of action selected from among alternatives and in light of given conditions to guide
and determine present and future decisions.
Potomac and Rappahannock Transportation Commission (PRTC): A multi-jurisdictional agency representing Prince
William, Stafford, and Spotsylvania Counties and the Cities of Manassas, Manassas Park, and Fredericksburg. PRTC
provides commuter bus services (OmniRide Express) and local bus services in Prince William County and the Cities of
Manassas and Manassas Park (OmniRide Local).




Proposed FY2027 Budget                                      480                                                   Appendix
                                                      Glossary
Principles of Sound Financial Management: Guidelines approved by the Board of County Supervisors to foster the
County government’s financial strength and stability and the achievement of the organization’s financial goals.
Proffers: Contributions of land, capital improvements, and funding collected from developers to address the demand for
community services created by new development.
Program: One or more related agency activities that work together for a purpose and function for which the County is
responsible.
Program Outcomes: Key measures that demonstrate how the community or individual will benefit or change based on
achieving the goal but are more specific to each individual agency and program than community outcomes.
Property Tax Rate: The rate of taxes levied against real or personal property expressed as dollars per $100 of equalized
assessed valuation of the property taxed.
Proprietary Fund Types: Proprietary Funds account for County activities that are similar to private sector businesses.
These funds measure net income, financial position, and changes in financial position. Proprietary fund types include
enterprise and internal service funds.
Real Property: Land, buildings, and all other permanent improvements on the land.
Resolution: The official position or will of a legislative body.
Resource Shift: The transfer of an expenditure budget from one purpose to another. A resource shift is a common and
preferred technique for funding budget increases without the allocation of increased outside revenue or County tax
support.
Resources: The actual assets of a governmental unit, such as cash, taxes, receivables, land, buildings, estimated revenues
applying to the current fiscal year, and bonds authorized and un-issued.
Restricted Fund Balance: Includes amounts that are restricted to specific purposes as follows:
   Externally imposed by creditors (such as through debt covenants), grantors, contributors, or laws or regulations of
    other governments.
   Imposed by law through constitutional provisions or enabling legislation.

Retained Earnings: See Total Net Assets.
Revenue: Income generated by taxes, notes, bonds, investment income, land rental, user charges, and federal and state
grants.
Revenue Bonds: A bond issued by a municipality for a specific project that is supported by the revenue from that project.
Risk Management: The practice of identifying potential risks in advance, analyzing them, and taking precautionary steps
to reduce and/or curb the risk, and in turn reduce the County’s exposure to financial loss.
Seat Management: Personal computer support services including customer service assistance, desktop and laptop desk
side services, software refreshment, and equipment disposal.
Self-Insurance Pool: A cash reserve used to provide stable and cost-effective loss funding on a self-insured basis rather
than using a private insurance company.
Service Levels: Quantified measures of the goods and services (outputs) produced by agency activities, the relationship
of resources required to outputs produced (efficiency), and the degree of excellence characterizing the outputs (service
quality).
Service Quality: The measurable degree of excellence with which goods and services are produced or provided, including
customer satisfaction.
Special Revenue Funds: Funds used to account for the proceeds of specific revenue sources (other than expendable
trusts or major capital projects) that are legally restricted to expenditures for specified purposes. These funds are used
to account for volunteer fire and rescue levies, school operations, the Regional Adult Detention Center, and the Office of
Housing & Community Development.
Statute: A law enacted by a legislative body.
Strategic Plan: A four-year plan adopted by the Board of County Supervisors which establishes a County government
mission statement, a limited number of high priority strategic goals, and measurable community outcomes which indicate
success in accomplishing these goals.
Sworn FTE: Personnel duly authorized under statute as a law enforcement individual who has taken an oath to support
and enforce the U.S. Constitution, state laws, and the laws of the agency’s jurisdiction.



Proposed FY2027 Budget                                             481                                           Appendix
                                                   Glossary
Tax Base: The part of the economy against which a tax is levied.
Taxes: Mandatory charges levied by a governmental unit for the purpose of financing services performed for the common
benefit.
Technology Improvement Plan: That portion of the Capital Improvement Program that is dedicated to the upgrade,
replacement, or addition of technology systems that support various programs and activities throughout County
agencies. Project examples include, but are not limited to, upgrades to email, replacement of critical information
technology infrastructure, and disaster recovery.
Temporary Assistance to Needy Families: A federal and state public assistance program.
Total Net Assets: The difference between assets and liabilities in a proprietary fund. This term has replaced Retained
Earnings.
Tracker: Board of County Supervisors, County Executive, or Deputy County Executive’s request for action by County
staff. Progress on the item is tracked by the County Executive’s Office until its successful completion.
Transfer: A shift of resources from one program or activity to another.
Trust and Agency Funds: Funds used to account for assets held by the County in a trustee capacity or as an agent
for individuals, private organizations, other governments, and/or other funds. The County has established Agency and
Expendable Trust Funds to account for library donations, special welfare, and certain other activities. Agency funds are
custodial in nature (assets equal liabilities) and do not involve measurement of results of operations. Expendable Trust
Funds are accounted for in essentially the same manner as Governmental Funds.
Unassigned Fund Balance: The total fund balance in the general fund in excess of non-spendable, restricted, committed,
and assigned fund balance.
Uniform FTE: As it relates to public safety, a uniformed official responsible for the supervision, safety, and security of
people and property.
User Fees: Charges for services, such as the use of public property and parking, paid by those benefiting from the service.
Virginia Railway Express (VRE): A transportation partnership of the Northern Virginia and Potomac and Rappahannock
Transportation Commissions, the Counties of Fairfax, Prince William, Stafford, Spotsylvania, and Arlington, and the Cities
of Manassas, Manassas Park, Fredericksburg, and Alexandria. VRE provides commuter rail service from the Northern
Virginia suburbs to Alexandria, Crystal City, and downtown Washington D.C.
Watershed: A region or area bounded peripherally by water parting and draining ultimately to a particular watercourse
or body of water.




Proposed FY2027 Budget                                      482                                                   Appendix
                                              Abbreviations
AAA: Triple A Bond rating, the highest possible rating        CES: Coordinated Entry System
AALL: American Association of Law Libraries                   CFH: Creating Foundations for Hope
AAOD: Agritourism and Arts Overlay District                   CHDO: Community Housing Development Organization
ACTS: Action in the Community Through Service                 CHE: Call Handling Equipment
ADA: Americans with Disabilities Act 1990                     CHP: Concealed Handgun Permit
ADC: Adult Detention Center                                   CHS: Clinical Homeless Services
Admin: Administrative                                         CID: Communications & Infrastructure Division
ADP: Average Daily Population                                 CIP: Capital Improvement Program
AED: Automatic External Defibrillator                         CJS: Criminal Justice Services
AFIS: Automated Fingerprint Identification System             CMAQ: Congestion Mitigation and Air Quality
AI: Artificial Intelligence                                   CMP: Cyclical Maintenance Plan
ALS: Advanced Life Support                                    CoC: Continuum of Care
APS: Adult Protective Services                                COG: Council of Governments
ARPA: American Rescue Plan Act                                CORP: Comprehensive Outpatient Recovery Program
ARRA: American Recovery and Reinvestment Act                  COVID-19: Coronavirus Disease 2019
B&A: Budget and Appropriate                                   CP&D: Community Preservation & Development
B&G: Buildings and Grounds                                    CPA: Comprehensive Plan Amendment
B&GC: Boys & Girls Club                                       CPI: Consumer Price Index
BAB: Build America Bonds                                      CPMT: Community Policy and Management Team
BAC: Board Audit Committee                                    CPS: Child Protective Services
BCE: Building Code Enforcement                                CRC: Crisis Receiving Center
BECC: Benefits, Employment & Child Care                       CRRSAA: Coronavirus Response and Relief Supplemental
                                                              Appropriations Act
BEST Lawn: Building Environmentally Sustainable Turf Lawn
                                                              CSA: Children’s Services Act
BLS: Basic Life Support
                                                              CSB: Community Services Board
Board: Board of County Supervisors
                                                              CSS: Customer Support & Service
BOCS: Board of County Supervisors
                                                              CWAO: Commonwealth’s Attorney’s Office
BPOL Tax: Business Professional and Occupational License
Tax                                                           CXO: County Executive
BRAVO: Behavioral Health Redesign for Access, Value and       CY: Calendar Year
Outcomes
                                                              DART: Days Away Restricted or Transferred
BTS: Business Technology Services
                                                              DBHDS: Department of Behavioral Health and Develop-
BWC: Body-Worn Camera                                         mental Services
CAD: Computer Assisted Dispatch or Computer-Aided De-         DBM: Decision Band Method
sign system (cannot be both simultaneously)
                                                              DCSM: Design and Construction Standards Manual
CALEA: Commission on Accreditation for Law Enforcement
                                                              DD: Development Disability
Agencies
                                                              DDS: Department of Development Services
CARES Act: Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security
Act                                                           DEDT: Department of Economic Development & Tourism
CBHP: Clinical Behavioral Health Program                      DEQ: Department of Environmental Quality
CCJB: Community Criminal Justice Board                        DFR: Department of Fire & Rescue
CDA: Community Development Authorities                        DJJ: Department of Juvenile Justice
CDBG: Community Development Block Grant                       DMAS: Department of Medical Assistance Services



Proposed FY2027 Budget                                      483                                                 Appendix
                                             Abbreviations
DMV: Department of Motor Vehicles                             FRS: Fire and Rescue System
DoIT: Department of Information Technology                    FSS: Family Self-Sufficiency
DOJ: Department of Justice                                    FTE: Full-Time Equivalent
DORM: Drug Offender Rehabilitation Module                     FY: Fiscal Year
DORS: Drug Offender Recovery Services                         GAAP: Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
DOT: Department of Transportation                             GASB: Government Accounting Standards Board
DPR: Department of Parks & Recreation                         GDC: General District Court
DPSC: Department of Public Safety Communications              GED: General Equivalency Diploma
DSS: Department of Social Services                            GFOA: Government Finance Officers Association
DTCC: Department of Transportation & Capital Construction     GIS: Geographic Information System
DV: Domestic Violence                                         GPS: Global Positioning System
E3: Exemplary Environmental Enterprise                        GRIT: Gang Response Intervention Team
E-911: Emergency 911                                          GSHF: Good Shepherd Housing Foundation
EAD: Early Assistance Desk                                    GTS: Geospatial Technology Services
EBDM: Evidence-Based Decision Making                          H&CB: Home & Community Based
EBP: Evidence-Based Practice                                  HAP: Homeownership Assistance Program
EBT: Electronic Benefits Transfer                             HAZMAT: Hazardous Materials
EDA: Economic Development Alliance                            HCE: Housing Counseling and Education
EDMS: Electronic Document Management System                   HCM: Human Capital Management
EEO: Equal Employment Opportunity                             HCVP: Housing Choice Voucher Program
EEOC: Equal Employment Opportunity Commission                 HIDTA: High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area
EHV: Emergency Housing Voucher                                HIPAA: Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
EM: Electronic Monitoring                                     HMIS: Homeless Management Information System
EMS: Emergency Medical Services                               HNC: Homeless Navigation Center
ENR: Environmental and Natural Resources                      HOA: Homeowners Association
ERP: Enterprise Resource Program                              HOC2: Home Occupation Certificate – Family Day Home
                                                              (Child Care)
ES: Emergency Services
                                                              HOV: High Occupancy Vehicle
ESG: Emergency Shelter Grant
                                                              HPAC: Hylton Performing Arts Center
ESOL: English for Speakers of Other Languages
                                                              HPC: Homeless Prevention Center
F&R: Fire and Rescue
                                                              HPDF: Housing Preservation and Development Fund
FAFC: Freedom Aquatic and Fitness Center
                                                              HRC: Human Rights Commission
FAPT: Family Assessment and Planning Team
                                                              HRIS: Human Resources Information System
FARM: Food and Agriculture Regional Members
                                                              HUD: Department of Housing and Urban Development
FAS: Ferlazzo Adult Shelter
                                                              HVAC: Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning
FCC: Federal Communications Commission
                                                              ICMA: International City/County Management Association
FCM: Facilities Construction Management
                                                              ICT: Intensive Community Treatment
FFM: Facilities & Fleet Management
                                                              ID: Intellectual Disability
FICA: Federal Insurance Contributions Act
                                                              IDA: Industrial Development Authority
FOIA: Freedom of Information Act
                                                              IEC: Independence Empowerment Center
FRA: Fire and Rescue Association
                                                              IEP: Individualized Educational Plan
FRC: Finance Reporting & Control


Proposed FY2027 Budget                                      484                                                 Appendix
                                              Abbreviations
IFB: Invitation for Bid                                      NOVA: Northern Virginia
IFSP: Individualized Family Service Plan                     NR: Not Reported
I-Net: Institutional Network                                 NVCC: Northern Virginia Community College
IPE: Intervention, Prevention and Education                  NVERS: Northern Virginia Emergency Response System
ISF: Internal Service Fund                                   NVFS: Northern Virginia Family Service
IT: Information Technology                                   NVRC: Northern Virginia Regional Commission
IVR: Interactive Voice Response                              NVTA: Northern Virginia Transportation Authority
JCSU: Juvenile Court Service Unit                            NVTC: Northern Virginia Transportation Commission
JDC: Juvenile Detention Center                               OEM: Office of Executive Management
JDRC: Juvenile & Domestic Relations Court                    OHCD: Office of Housing & Community Development
JSC: Juvenile Services Campus                                OMB: Office of Management & Budget
KPWB: Keep Prince William Beautiful                          OPEB: Other Post-Employment Benefits
LAN: Local Area Network                                      OSHA: Occupational Safety and Health Administration
LCI: Local Composite Index                                   OWL: Occoquan-Woodbridge-Lorton (Volunteer Fire De-
                                                             partment)
LEOS: Law Enforcement Officers’ Supplement
                                                             OZ: Opportunity Zone
LODA: Line of Duty Act
                                                             PA: Public Assistance
LOSAP: Length of Service Award Program
                                                             PAF: Personnel Action Form
LPGA: Ladies Professional Golf Association
                                                             PATH: Projects for Assistance in Transitioning the Homeless
LSNV: Legal Services of Northern Virginia
                                                             PCE: Property Code Enforcement
LTC: Long-Term Care
                                                             PCN: Position Control Number
LVA-PW: Literacy Volunteers of America – Prince William,
Inc.                                                         PCP: Position Classification Plan
MAGIC: Management and Government Information Center          PHNST: Potomac Heritage National Scenic Trail
MAO: Maintenance and Operation                               PM: Project Managers
MAT: Medication Assisted Treatment                           PMAH: Project Mend-A-House
MCBQ: Marine Corps Base Quantico                             PMO: Portfolio Management Office
MDC: Mobile Data Computer                                    PPTRA: Personal Property Tax Relief Act
MDT: Mobile Data Terminal                                    Prop: Property
MH: Mental Health                                            PRTC: Potomac and Rappahannock Transportation Com-
                                                             mission
MHz: Megahertz
                                                             PSCC: Public Safety Communications Center
MIS: Management Information System
                                                             PSFM: Principles of Sound Financial Management
MOU: Memorandum of Understanding
                                                             PSSF: Promoting Safe and Stable Families
MS4: Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
                                                             PSTC: Public Safety Training Center
NA: Not Available
                                                             PWC: Prince William County
NACO: National Association of Counties
                                                             PWCFRS: Prince William County Fire & Rescue System
NADA: National Automobile Dealers Association
                                                             PWCS: Prince William County Schools
NCIC: National Crime Information Center
                                                             PWHD: Prince William Health District
NCR: National Capital Region
                                                             PWPL: Prince William Public Library
NENA: National Emergency Number Association
                                                             PWSI: Prince William Soccer, Inc.
NFPA: National Fire Protection Association
                                                             PWSIG: Prince William Self-Insurance Group
NG911: Next Generation 911


Proposed FY2027 Budget                                     485                                                  Appendix
                                              Abbreviations
QC: Quality Control                                       VACO: Virginia Association of Counties
QSCB: Qualified School Construction Bonds                 VCE: Virginia Cooperative Extension
RELIC: Ruth E. Lloyd Information Center                   VCIN: Virginia Criminal Information Network
REZ: Rezoning                                             VDH: Virginia Department of Health
RFP: Request for Proposal                                 VDOT: Virginia Department of Transportation
ROI: Return on Investment                                 VFD: Volunteer Fire Department
SA: Substance Abuse                                       VIEW: Virginia Initiative for Employment not Welfare
SACC: School Age Child Care                               VLEPSC: Virginia Law Enforcement Professional Standards
                                                          Commission
SAFMR: Small Area Fair Market Rent
                                                          VOIP: Voice Over Internet Protocol
SASE: Secure Access Service Edge
                                                          VPRAI: Virginia Pre-trial Risk Assessment Instrument
SAVAS: Sexual Assault Victims Advocacy Service
                                                          VPSA: Virginia Public School Authority
SBD: Small Business Development
                                                          VPW: Volunteer Prince William
SCBA: Self-Contained Breathing Apparatus
                                                          VRE: Virginia Railway Express
SED: Seriously Emotionally Disturbed
                                                          VRS: Virginia Retirement System
SERVE: Securing Emergency Resources through Volunteer
Efforts                                                   VSMP: Virginia Stormwater Management Program
SF: Square Feet                                           WAN: Wide Area Network
SMI: Seriously Mentally Ill                               WFGA: When Families Get Angry
SNAP: Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program           WIC: Women, Infants, and Children
SRAP: State Rental Assistance Program                     WMATA: Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority
SRO: School Resource Officer                              YAS: Young Adult Services
STD: Sexually Transmitted Disease                         ZA: Zoning Administration
STEP: Systematic Training for Effective Parenting         ZTA: Zoning Text Amendment
STEP-VA: System Transformation Excellence and Perfor-
mance
STI: Sexually Transmitted Infection
SUP: Special Use Permit
SWM: Stormwater Management
TANF: Temporary Assistance to Needy Families
TB: Tuberculosis
TBD: To Be Determined
TBRA: Tenant-Based Rental Assistance
TIP: Technology Improvement Plan
TMDL: Total Maximum Daily Load
TSII: Transportation Safety Intersection Improvement
TOT: Transient Occupancy Tax
TRIP: Transportation and Roadway Improvement Program
UOSA: Upper Occoquan Service Authority
USDA: United States Department of Agriculture
USPS: United States Postal Service
VaCMS: Virginia Case Management System



Proposed FY2027 Budget                                  486                                                 Appendix
