Principles of Sound Financial
Management
July 2024
                              Principles of Sound Financial Management
                                                 Prince William County




         Principles
             of
Sound Financial Management

          Prince William County

                     July 2024

           Board of County Supervisors
            Deshundra L. Jefferson Chair
            Kenny A. Boddye, Vice Chair
                  Victor S. Angry
                 Andrea O. Bailey
             Margaret Angela Franklin
                    Tom Gordy
                     Yesli Vega
                     Bob Weir



                 County Executive
                Christopher J. Shorter

     Chief Financial Officer/Director of Finance
                 Michelle L. Attreed
                                            Principles of Sound Financial Management
                                                               Prince William County



                               Introduction

Prince William County is a diverse community striving to be healthy, safe, and
caring with a thriving economy and a protected natural environment. The
Principles of Sound Financial Management establish a foundation for the fiscal
strength and stability of the County’s government. Specifically, these Principles
guide the Board of County Supervisors, County Executive, and staff when making
fiscal decisions regarding resource allocations and annual appropriations. Fiscal
principles assure sound stewardship of taxpayer dollars. The principles guide the
County in the planning of expenditures, revenues and funding arrangements for
public programs and services to achieve the goals, objectives and long-term vision
defined by the County’s Comprehensive and Strategic Plans. Additionally, these
principles ensure budget flexibility and structural stability to weather economic
cycles.

The financial condition of the County must be maintained at the highest level
to assure resources are available to meet the community’s ever-changing
needs and these Principles reflect the County’s commitment to continued fiscal
strength.

Prince William County initially adopted the Principles of Sound Financial
Management in December 1988, and amended the Principles in 1993, 1996,
1999, 2009, 2012, 2016 and 2018. As the County and its population continue
to grow and become more complex and diverse, policy changes are
occasionally needed. This edition marks the eighth amendment to the
Principles of Sound Financial Management.

Establishing, adhering to, and updating these guiding financial policies have
enhanced the County's image and credibility with the public, credit rating
agencies, and investors. Just as important as it is to regularly engage in the
process of financial planning, a regular review and update of these financial
guidelines, including reaffirmation, is not only a best practice but also
reflective of a strategic, long-term approach to financial management.

The Principles of Sound Financial Management apply to the County and its
agencies, but do not apply to the Prince William County School Board, an
independent entity.
                                                                   Principles of Sound Financial Management
                                                                                               Prince William County

                                          Table of Contents

Fund Balance .................................................................................................. 4
Fiscal Planning ................................................................................................ 8
Revenues ......................................................................................................... 11
Capital Improvement Program and Capital Assets ..................................... 14
Debt Management ......................................................................................... 16
Cash Management ......................................................................................... 19
Personnel ........................................................................................................ 20
Internal Control and Financial Reporting ..................................................... 22
Risk Management ........................................................................................... 24
Procurement ................................................................................................... 26
Economic Development ................................................................................. 27
Policy Review ................................................................................................... 29
Glossary ........................................................................................................... 30
                                              Principles of Sound Financial Management
                                                                 Prince William County


                                 Policy I
                              Fund Balance

The County shall maintain a fund balance position that meets the County’s needs
and challenges and mitigates current and future risks. Fund balance measures the
net financial resources available to finance the County government. Rating
agencies examine fund balance when considering the overall economic health and
credit quality of the County.

1.00 Unassigned General Fund Balance

      1.01 The County's Unassigned General Fund Balance will be
      maintained to provide the County with sufficient working capital and a
      margin of safety to address local and regional emergencies without
      borrowing.

      1.02 Except for the provisions contained in Policy No. 1.05, the
      Unassigned General Fund Balance will not be less than seven and one-
      half percent (7.5%), of each year’s General Fund revenues in every fiscal
      year of the Five-Year Plan.

      1.03 The Unassigned General Fund Balance can only be appropriated
      by a resolution of the Board of County Supervisors.

      1.04 The Unassigned General Fund Balance should not be used to
      support recurring operating expenditures outside of the current fiscal
      year. The Unassigned General Fund Balance shall be used only to cover
      local and regional emergencies. If the Unassigned General Fund Balance
      is used for such emergencies, the County will take measures necessary
      to prevent its use in the following fiscal year by increasing General Fund
      revenues and/or decreasing its expenditures.

      1.05 In the event the Unassigned General Fund Balance is used to
      provide for temporary funding of unforeseen emergency needs, the
      County shall restore the Unassigned General Fund Balance to the
      minimum level of seven and one-half percent (7.5%) of General Fund
      revenues within two (2) fiscal years following the fiscal year in which the
      event occurred. The plan to restore the Unassigned General Fund


                                     Page 4
                                             Principles of Sound Financial Management
                                                                Prince William County

     Balance shall be included and highlighted in the County’s Adopted Five-
     Year Plan.

     1.06 Funds in excess of seven and one-half percent (7.5%) of the
     annual requirements of Policy No. 1.02 may be retained in the
     Unassigned General Fund Balance, used to supplement "pay as you go”
     capital outlay expenditures, prepay existing County debt, or be added
     to the Revenue Stabilization Reserve.

1.10 Committed Fund Balance – Revenue Stabilization Reserve

     1.11 The County shall maintain a portion of the General Fund Balance
     as a “Revenue Stabilization” Reserve to provide the County with
     sufficient working capital and a margin of safety to withstand local and
     regional economic shocks, and unexpected declines in revenue without
     borrowing.

     1.12 Except for the provisions contained in Policy No. 1.14 and Policy
     No. 1.15, the Revenue Stabilization Reserve will not be less than two
     percent (2.0%) of each year’s General Fund revenues in every fiscal year
     of the Five-Year Plan.

     1.13 The Revenue Stabilization Reserve can only be appropriated by a
     resolution of the Board of County Supervisors.

     1.14 The Revenue Stabilization Reserve may be used to cover a
     portion of local and regional economic shocks and/or unexpected
     declines in the County’s share of General Fund revenues greater than
     three percent (3%) as compared to the current Adopted Budget.

     1.15 In the event of a local or regional emergency, the Revenue
     Stabilization Reserve may be appropriated in portion or entirety by a
     resolution of the Board of County Supervisors to provide for additional
     temporary funding of unforeseen emergency needs.

     1.16 If the Revenue Stabilization Reserve is used, the County will take
     measures necessary to replenish its balance to the minimum level
     described within five (5) years following the year(s) in which it was used.



                                    Page 5
                                             Principles of Sound Financial Management
                                                                Prince William County

     The plan to restore the Revenue Stabilization Reserve shall be included
     and highlighted in the County’s Adopted Five-Year Plan.

     1.17 Funds in excess of two percent (2%) of the annual requirement of
     Policy No. 1.12 may be retained in the Revenue Stabilization Reserve,
     transferred to the Unassigned General Fund Balance described in Policy
     No. 1.00, transferred to the Committed Fund Balance - Capital Reserve
     described in Policy No. 1.20, or used to replenish the Economic
     Development Opportunity Fund as described in Policy No. 1.30 or the
     Data Center Revenue Stabilization Reserve as described in Policy No.
     1.40.

1.20 Committed Fund Balance – Capital Reserve

     1.21 The County will maintain a “Capital Reserve” to provide the
     County with sufficient working capital and a margin of safety to
     withstand unexpected, but necessary, project cost overruns without
     additional borrowing. The target balance for the Capital Reserve shall
     be a minimum of two percent (2.0%) of the current Capital Projects
     Funds Appropriations included in the Adopted Six-Year Capital
     Improvement Program.

     1.22 The Capital Reserve can only be appropriated by a resolution of
     the Board of County Supervisors for a new or existing capital project.

     1.23 In the event the Capital Reserve is used to provide funding for
     critical capital projects, the County shall restore the Capital Reserve to
     the target level of two percent (2.0%) of the current Capital Projects
     Funds Appropriations within five (5) fiscal years following the fiscal year
     in which the event occurred. The plan to restore the Capital Reserve
     shall be included and highlighted in the County’s Adopted Five-Year
     Plan.

1.30 Committed Fund Balance – Economic Development Opportunity
     Fund (EDOF) Reserve

     1.31 The County will maintain an “Economic Development
     Opportunity Fund” (EDOF) Reserve to provide the County with a source
     of working capital that can be used to incentivize economic


                                    Page 6
                                           Principles of Sound Financial Management
                                                              Prince William County

     development in key targeted industries to support the Board’s Robust
     Economy strategic goal of growing the commercial tax base. The target
     balance for the EDOF Reserve shall be $3,000,000.

     1.32 The EDOF Reserve can only be appropriated by a resolution of
     the Board of County Supervisors.

     1.33 The EDOF Reserve shall be replenished to the targeted
     $3,000,000 threshold at the end of each fiscal year after the
     requirements of Policy Nos. 1.02, 1.12, and 1.21 are met.

1.40 Committed Fund Balance – Data Center Revenue Stabilization
     Reserve

     1.41 The County will maintain a “Data Center Revenue Stabilization”
     Reserve to provide the County with a source of working capital and a
     margin of safety to withstand shocks and unexpected declines in
     revenue generated by data centers without borrowing. The target
     balance for the Data Center Revenue Stabilization Reserve shall be 10%
     of the prior fiscal year audited tax revenue generated from data center
     computer equipment and peripherals.

     1.42 The Data Center Revenue Stabilization Reserve can only be
     appropriated by a resolution of the Board of County Supervisors.

     1.43 The Data Center Revenue Stabilization Reserve shall be
     replenished to the targeted 10% threshold at the end of each fiscal year
     after the requirements of Policy Nos. 1.02, 1.12, 1.21 and 1.31 are met.




                                  Page 7
                                               Principles of Sound Financial Management
                                                                  Prince William County




                                  Policy II
                              Fiscal Planning

The Annual Budget is one of the most important documents the County prepares
since it identifies the programs and services to be provided and the means by which
the programs and services are to be funded or financed.

2.01   The County will maintain a structurally balanced budget.

2.02 The County Executive will propose a budget prepared in compliance
with the applicable sections of the Code of Virginia, the Financial and Program
Planning Ordinance requirements included in Section 2-1, Government
Services, Planning, Budgeting and Accountability of Chapter 2- Administration,
of the Prince William County Code and in accordance with the guidelines
established by the Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA) in its
Distinguished Budget Award Program.

2.03 The County Executive will annually submit a Five-Year Plan for review
and adoption by the Board of County Supervisors, including revenue and
expenditure projections for the General Fund. The Five-Year Plan shall provide
multi-year impacts of fiscal decisions and weigh the corresponding
implications of tax rates and changes thereto and other revenue sources.

2.04 The Five-Year Plan shall provide for the County-School Revenue Sharing
Agreement which splits the County’s General Revenues with the Schools in
accordance with the existing agreement approved by the Board of County
Supervisors.

2.05 Every year of the Adopted Five-Year Plan must be balanced and limits
expenditures and other uses of resources to annually available revenues. The
County shall not adopt a budget that includes operating deficits or that
requires the use of one-time resources to cover recurring expenditures.

2.06   The Annual Budget will contain the following:

       a)    Proposed personnel staffing levels;




                                      Page 8
                                             Principles of Sound Financial Management
                                                                Prince William County

      b)     Revenue estimates by major category;

      c)     Expenditure estimates by program levels and major expenditure
             categories;

      d)     A detailed schedule of capital projects;

      e)     Debt service summarized by project and identifies supporting
             amounts by fund; and

      f)     Any additional information, data, or analysis requested of
             management by the Board of County Supervisors.

2.07 The Annual Budget will not automatically replace lost State or Federal
revenue with local tax support. Doing so will occur only after careful
consideration of service level impacts to affected agencies during the annual
budget process and in accordance with Policy No. 3.11.

2.08 The Annual Budget shall be adopted by the Board of County Supervisors
in accordance with the requirements of § 15.2-2500 et seq. and § 22.1-93 of
the Code of Virginia.

2.09 A quarterly report on the status of General Fund revenues,
expenditures, budget, projections, and trends will be provided to the Board of
County Supervisors within forty-five (45) days of the end of each quarter with
the exception of the 4th quarter report. A preliminary 4th quarter report shall
be provided to the Board of County Supervisors within ninety (90) days of the
end of the quarter. The audited Annual Comprehensive Financial Report
(ACFR) shall serve as the final 4th quarter report.

2.10 The unencumbered capital project balances and encumbered balances
will be considered for re-appropriation by the Board of County Supervisors in
the subsequent fiscal year by resolution amending the adopted budget.

2.11 The County will not balance the current budget at the expense of
meeting future years' expenditures; for example, the County will not accrue
future years' revenues or roll over short-term debt to avoid planned debt
retirement. The County will not use debt to fund current operations.




                                    Page 9
                                           Principles of Sound Financial Management
                                                              Prince William County

2.12 If a deficit is projected during any fiscal year, the County will take steps
to reduce expenditures, increase revenues or, if a deficit is caused by an
emergency, consider using the Revenue Stabilization Reserve and/or the
General Fund Unassigned Fund Balance, to the extent necessary to ensure a
structurally balanced budget at the close of the fiscal year.

2.13 The Board of County Supervisors will annually appropriate a
contingency budget to provide for unanticipated increases in service delivery
costs and needs that may arise throughout the fiscal year. The contingency
budget will be established at a minimum of $1,000,000 annually and may be
allocated only by resolution of the Board of County Supervisors.

2.14 Executive Management and department heads are required to monitor
revenues and control expenditures to prevent exceeding the amount of local
tax support budgeted for their respective department and total departmental
expenditure budget.

2.15 Budget transfers will provide sufficient agency operating flexibility while
ensuring adherence to generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) and
the Board of County Supervisors’ adopted policies, budget and appropriation
amendments thereto.

2.16 The County will maintain a Capital Asset and Equipment Replacement
Schedule which provides a five-year estimate of the funds necessary to
maintain and replace the County’s capital assets and equipment. The Capital
Asset and Equipment Replacement Schedule will be updated as part of the
Capital Improvement Program planning process.

2.17 The County will fully fund its Annual Required Contributions associated
with its pension and other post-employment benefit obligations, as actuarially
determined.




                                     Page 10
                                               Principles of Sound Financial Management
                                                                  Prince William County


                                   Policy III
                                   Revenues

The County collects revenues from many sources, the largest of which is from real
and personal property taxes, to provide programs and services consistent with the
Board’s Comprehensive and Strategic Plans and related long-term vision, goals and
objectives. The structure, diversification, fluctuation, and collection of revenues are
examined by rating agencies to determine the County's credit quality and ability to
pay bondholders.

3.01 The County will strive to maintain a diversified and stable revenue
system to shelter it from short-term fluctuations in any one revenue source.

3.02   Major revenue sources should provide for the following principles:

   a) Vertical Equity - Revenue sources should provide appropriate
      treatment of taxpayers at different economic levels.

   b) Horizontal Equity - Revenue sources should treat taxpayers with the
      same income or wealth equally.

   c) Neutrality - Revenue sources should not unduly influence economic
      decisions by consumers or business except for targeted development
      or redevelopment programs approved by the Board of County
      Supervisors.

   d) Administrative and Compliance Costs - Revenue administration and
      enforcement should not absorb an undue percentage of revenue
      collected.

3.03 The County will monitor all taxes to ensure equitable administration
and collections are timely and accurate. The County will aggressively collect all
taxes and related penalties and interest as authorized by the Code of Virginia.

3.04 The County will periodically recalculate the full costs of providing
services to provide a basis for setting the associated service charge or fee. Full
cost shall incorporate direct and indirect costs, including operations and
maintenance, overhead, and charges for use of capital facilities, thereby


                                       Page 11
                                          Principles of Sound Financial Management
                                                             Prince William County

setting fees at a level that is related to the cost of producing the good or
service, unless otherwise restricted by law. The County will periodically
examine the competitiveness of tax rates and fees and may establish new
taxes and fees as needed and as permitted by law. It is recognized that
competing policy objectives may result in user fee levels that recover only a
portion of service costs.

3.05 The County Executive will provide the Board of County Supervisors with
an estimate of the County's revenues annually for each year of the Five-Year
Plan and in compliance with the Financial and Program Planning Ordinance
requirements included in Section 2-1, Government Services, Planning,
Budgeting and Accountability of Chapter 2 - Administration, of the Prince
William County Code.

3.06 The estimate of the County’s revenues shall be set at realistic and
attainable levels, sufficiently conservative to avoid shortfalls, yet accurate
enough to avoid a systematic pattern of setting tax rates that produce
significantly more revenue than is necessary to meet expenditure, fund
balance and reserve requirements.

3.07 A quarterly report on the status of the General Revenues, projections,
and trends will be provided to the Board of County Supervisors in conjunction
with Policy No. 2.09.

3.08 The County will assess all property annually as of January 1st in
accordance with Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia. Real property assessments
shall be based on fair market value and follow standards established by the
International Association of Assessing Officers (IAAO). Personal property
assessments shall be based on the clean trade-in value as supplied by a
nationally recognized pricing guide, or a percentage or percentages of original
cost which reasonably approximate market value.

3.09 The County may provide, as appropriate, tax exemptions to churches
and governmental entities pursuant to State code, local ordinances, and other
guidelines. Charitable, benevolent, or educational institutions may seek public
funding through the Community Partners Program and such requests must
be submitted annually to the Office of Management and Budget as part of the
annual budget process. Any consideration for exemption from the process



                                    Page 12
                                          Principles of Sound Financial Management
                                                             Prince William County

should be based on benefits to and fiscal capacity of the County and subject
to approval by the Board of County Supervisors.

3.10 The County will achieve maximum possible accuracy in its annual
assessment to sales ratio when the annual January 1st assessment is
compared to sales in the preceding calendar year. The County expects to
achieve maximum possible accuracy by implementing state-of-the-art
assessment practices. The County will maintain an average error, measured
by the coefficient of dispersion (COD), and assessment to sales ratio better
than the current professional standard which is ninety percent (90%)
assessment to sales ratio and ten percent (10%) COD as published by the
International Association of Assessing Officers (IAAO).

3.11 The County will pursue intergovernmental aid, including grants, for
those programs and activities that address a recognized need and are
consistent with the County's long-range objectives, and will attempt to recover
all allowable costs associated with those programs. Any decision to pursue
intergovernmental aid should be consistent with the County’s Grants
Management Policies and Procedures and include the consideration of the
following:

      a)     Present and future funding requirements;

      b)     Cost of administering the funds;

      c)     Costs associated with special conditions or regulations attached
             to the grant award; and

      d)     When grants or other intergovernmental aid are reduced or
             eliminated, the program, service, or project the grant supported
             will be reduced by a commensurate amount in accordance with
             Policy No. 2.07.




                                    Page 13
                                                Principles of Sound Financial Management
                                                                    Prince William County


                     Policy IV
   Capital Improvement Program and Capital Assets

The County's capital assets are primarily in the form of infrastructure, facilities, site
improvements, vehicles, and equipment. Dedicating resources to new capital
investment and the maintenance of existing capital assets is appropriate for a
growing community such as Prince William County. New and well-maintained
capital assets support the delivery of programs and services to County residents,
benefit economic development, and improve credit quality and the overall quality
of life in Prince William County.

4.01 The County will invest a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the annual
General Fund revenues allocated to the County's operating budget in the
Capital Improvement Program. The amount invested can be in the form of
debt service or other cash (“pay-as-you-go”) contribution. The County will
direct its annual allocation for its capital investments to projects that best
support the County’s Comprehensive and Strategic Plans and related long-
term vision, goals, objectives, and County commissioned master plans.

4.02 The County Executive will annually submit a Six-Year Capital
Improvement Program for review and adoption by the Board of County
Supervisors. The Capital Improvement Program may include capital
improvements for the County and all agencies for which the County sets tax
rates, makes levies or approves budgets or programs.

4.03 The Capital Improvement Program shall be prepared in accordance with
§ 15.2-2239 of the Code of Virginia and the Financial and Program Planning
Ordinance included in Section 2-1, Government Services, Planning, Budgeting
and Accountability of Chapter 2- Administration, of the Prince William County
Code.

4.04   The Capital Improvement Program shall include the following elements:

       a)     An implementation plan for each of the capital improvements;

       b)     A statement of the objectives of the Capital Improvement
              Program and the relationship with the County’s Comprehensive




                                        Page 14
                                           Principles of Sound Financial Management
                                                              Prince William County

             and Strategic Plans and related long-term vision, goals and
             objectives; and

      c)     An estimate of the cost and anticipated sources of revenue for
             financing the capital improvements for each project and an
             estimate of the impact of each capital improvement on County
             revenues and the capital and operating budgets, including
             estimated debt service costs, if applicable.

4.05 The County will fund programs and activities identified in the Capital
Improvement Program with the most appropriate revenue sources. Such
revenues as the fire & rescue levy, proffers and user fees, such as solid waste
and stormwater fees, are to be used exclusively for the purpose for which they
were levied or collected.

4.06 The County will invest in ongoing, cyclical maintenance and/or
replacement of existing capital assets, including facilities, systems, equipment,
vehicles, apparatus, parks and technology, to prevent major breakdowns or
deterioration, with the goal of extending the useful life. The County will
maintain a schedule of needed repair(s), maintenance, and replacement(s) of
existing capital assets with an estimate of associated costs. Cyclical
maintenance should be prioritized to ensure that the most important needs
are addressed first. Routine maintenance should focus on activities that
preserve the useful life of the asset.

4.07 Upon completion of any capital project, the County will transfer
remaining appropriated funds to the Capital Reserve.

4.08 When current revenues or resources are available for capital
improvement projects, consideration will be given first to those capital assets
with the shortest useful life, technology and/or to those capital assets whose
nature makes them comparatively more difficult or expensive to finance with
bonds or lease financing.

4.09 Nonrecurring revenues, which cannot be used to fund recurring costs
and are not required to meet the objectives in Policy No. 1.00, 1.10, 1.20, 1.30
and 1.40, respectively, should be used for nonrecurring capital expenditures
such as “pay-as-you-go” capital investment, special studies, master plans, or
the early retirement of existing County debt.


                                     Page 15
                                             Principles of Sound Financial Management
                                                                Prince William County


                                Policy V
                           Debt Management

The County will maintain a high credit rating to assure taxpayers and investors that
the County government is well managed and financially sound and to reduce
borrowing costs. The County will prudently consider long-term debt financing using
various debt instruments when deemed appropriate and after consideration of
debt capacity and affordability.

5.01 The County will consider the project and its useful life and utilize the
most appropriate debt instrument or other means to finance the project.
Sources may include debt financing, "pay-as-you-go" capital investment, or
other financing structures.

5.02 The County will adhere to the following guidelines when it finds it
necessary to issue tax supported bonds:

        a)     Tax supported bonds will, whenever feasible; be issued on a
               competitive basis unless market conditions or the nature of the
               financing favors negotiated sales;

        b)     Average weighted maturities for General Obligation (GO) bonds
               of the County, and whenever possible for any type of annual
               appropriation debt, will be maintained at ten and one-half
               (10.5) years, or less;

        c)     GO bond issues, and whenever possible for any type of annual
               appropriation debt, will be structured to allow an equal
               principal amount to be retired each year over the life of the
               issue thereby producing a total debt service with an annual
               declining balance;

        d)     Annual net tax supported debt service expenditures shall not
               exceed ten percent (10%) of annual revenues or thirteen
               percent (13%) of General Fund plus Fire & Rescue Levy Fund
               expenditures;




                                      Page 16
                                          Principles of Sound Financial Management
                                                             Prince William County

        e)    Total bonded debt will not exceed three percent (3%) of the net
              assessed valuation of taxable real and personal property in the
              County;

        f)    Bond financing will be confined to projects which cannot
              otherwise be financed from current revenues; and

        g)    The term of any bond or lease obligation issuance will not
              exceed the useful life of the capital asset for which the
              borrowing is intended.

5.03 The County shall comply with all U.S. Internal Revenue Service (IRS) rules
and regulations regarding issuance of tax-exempt debt, including arbitrage
rebate requirements for bonded indebtedness, and with all Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC) requirements for continuing disclosure of the
County’s financial condition, and with all applicable Municipal Securities
Rulemaking Board (MSRB) requirements, including SEC Rule 15c2-12.

5.04 The County shall comply with all requirements of the Public Finance Act
as included in Title 15.2 of the Code of Virginia and other legal requirements
regarding the issuance of bonds and certificates of the County or its debt
issuing authorities.

5.05 The issuance of variable rate debt by the County will be subject to the
most careful review and will be issued only in a prudent and fiscally
responsible manner.

5.06 The County will adhere to the following guidelines when it finds it
necessary to issue revenue bonds:

      a)     For any bonds or lease anticipation or appropriation debt in
             which the debt service is partially paid from revenue generated
             by the project and partially paid from tax sources, the portion of
             the bond or lease to the extent that its debt service is paid from
             non-tax sources shall be deemed to be revenue bonds and are
             excluded from the calculation of the annual debt service
             limitation in Policy No. 5.02(d) and No. 5.02(e);




                                    Page 17
                                          Principles of Sound Financial Management
                                                             Prince William County

       b)    Revenue bonds of the County and any of its agencies will be
             analyzed carefully by the Chief Financial Officer/Director of
             Finance and applicable Department of Finance staff for fiscal
             soundness. The issuance of County revenue bonds will be subject
             to the most careful review and must be secured by covenants
             sufficient to protect the bondholders and the credibility of the
             County;

       c)    Whenever feasible, revenue bonds will be issued on a
             competitive basis and will be structured to allow an
             approximately equal annual debt service amount over the life of
             the issue;

       d)    Debt service reserve funds, when required, will be provided to
             adequately meet debt service requirements in the subsequent
             years;

       e)    Interest earnings on the debt service reserve fund balances will
             only be used to pay debt service on the bonds; and

       f)    The term of any revenue bond or lease obligation issue will not
             exceed the useful life of the capital project or equipment for
             which the borrowing is intended.

5.07   The County will not use debt financing to fund current operations.

5.08 The County does not intend to issue bond anticipation notes (BANS), tax
anticipation notes (TANS), revenue anticipation notes (RANS), or pension
obligation bonds (POBS). If a BAN is issued for a capital project, the BAN will
be converted to a long-term bond or redeemed at its maturity.




                                    Page 18
                                            Principles of Sound Financial Management
                                                               Prince William County


                               Policy VI
                          Cash Management

Cash management is the practice of safeguarding and maximizing the income
earned on liquid assets. Cash, liquidity, and investment management activities
shall be conducted prudently. The County shall maintain adequate management
procedures, controls, and policies to protect the County’s liquid assets.

6.01 The Chief Financial Officer/Director of Finance, as Chief Investment
Officer, shall invest all funds of the County according to four criteria, in order
of importance: (1) legality, (2) safety (3) liquidity, and (4) yield.

6.02 The County shall comply with all requirements of the Virginia Security
for Public Deposits Act as included in § 2.2-4400 of the Code of Virginia
regarding securing public deposits.

6.03 All County funds will be invested in compliance with the Investment of
Public Funds Act contained in § 2.2-4500 through § 2.2-4518 of the Code of
Virginia.

6.04 The County shall maintain and comply with a written Investment Policy
approved and adopted by the Board of County Supervisors.

6.05 A formal Investment Oversight Committee, as established by the Board
of County Supervisors, shall monitor the performance and structure of the
County’s investment portfolio. The Investment Oversight Committee shall
provide a quarterly report on investment performance and structure to the
Board of County Supervisors, along with related meeting minutes.




                                     Page 19
                                           Principles of Sound Financial Management
                                                              Prince William County


                                Policy VII
                                Personnel

Human capital costs are the most significant portion of the County’s operating
budget. The strategic management of personnel requires comprehensive planning
and analysis to develop, implement and evaluate programs that support employee
performance of goals and objectives, productivity, retention of the workforce and
succession planning.

7.01 The County shall maintain a written classification system, compensation
plan and personnel policies in accordance with the Prince William County
Code, Chapter 19 - Personnel issued pursuant to § 15.1-7.1 and § 15.1-7.2 of
the Code of Virginia and all other applicable sections of State and Federal laws.

7.02 County personnel shall adhere to legal, moral, ethical, and professional
standards of conduct in the fulfillment of their professional responsibilities,
including the Vision, Values, Ethics and Leadership at All Levels philosophies
as promulgated by the County Executive.

7.03 The County shall have an employee compensation policy to provide
competitive salaries and benefits and will work in good faith with legally
established collective bargaining unit(s) for the purpose of entering into a
collective bargaining agreement.




                                     Page 20
                                             Principles of Sound Financial Management
                                                                Prince William County


                         Policy VIII
          Internal Control and Financial Reporting

Internal control or the system of internal controls is broadly defined as a process,
administered by the County’s management and other personnel, designed to
provide reasonable assurance that the organization will achieve its objectives in
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, reliability and accuracy of financial
reporting and compliance with applicable laws, regulations and policies of Prince
William County Government. Financial reporting provides the informational
infrastructure for the County.

8.01 The County will maintain a system of internal controls to maintain
accountability to taxpayers, bondholders, the public and the Board of County
Supervisors, meet established goals and objectives, promote adherence to
laws and regulations, encourage sound financial and operational practices,
develop and maintain accurate, reliable and timely financial and management
data, safeguard assets/resources, prevent, detect and deter fraud, and
facilitate both internal and external audits.

8.02 The County will adhere to an Internal Control Policy and establish
related internal control policies and procedures based on the Internal Control
– Integrated Framework and Enterprise Risk Management – Integrated Framework
developed by the Committee on Sponsoring Organizations (COSO). This
compilation will provide the components of the control environment, risk
assessment, control activities, communication and monitoring that will work
together to provide reasonable assurance of meeting the County’s
operational, compliance and reporting goals.

8.03 The County will maintain an independent internal audit function to
enhance the County’s overall control environment. The internal audit function
shall adhere to the Institute of Internal Auditors’ Code of Ethics and the
International Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal Auditing as well
as Generally Accepted Government Auditing Standards.

8.04 The County will establish and maintain a Board Audit Committee to
govern and provide oversight of the County’s internal control environment.
The Board Audit Committee will coordinate activities between the Board of
County Supervisors and the independent internal auditor(s) in connection with


                                      Page 21
                                          Principles of Sound Financial Management
                                                             Prince William County

the performance and results of internal audits as stipulated by the Board
adopted annual Internal Audit Plan.

8.05 The County shall have all their accounts and records, including all
accounts and records of its constitutional officers, audited annually in
accordance with the applicable sections of the Code of Virginia.

8.06 The County will contract for an annual comprehensive financial audit,
including an audit of Federal grants in accordance with 2 CFR Part 200, Uniform
Guidance to be performed by an independent external auditor (public
accounting firm). The independent external auditor will express an opinion on
the County's financial statements.

8.07 The County’s Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (ACFR) will be
prepared in accordance with the Code of Virginia and the Uniform Financial
Reporting Manual for Virginia Counties, issued by the Commonwealth of Virginia
Auditor of Public Accounts (APA) and the guidelines established by the
Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA) in its Certificate of
Achievement for Excellence in Financial Reporting Award Program.

8.08 The County will comply with United States generally accepted
accounting principles (GAAP) in its accounting and financial reporting, as
contained in the following publications:

   a) Codification and Pronouncements of Governmental Accounting and
      Financial Reporting Standards, issued by the Governmental Accounting
      Standards Board (GASB);

   b) Codification and Pronouncements of Accounting and Financial Reporting
      Standards, issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board, (FASB);

   c) Governmental Accounting, Auditing, and Financial Reporting (GAAFR),
      issued by the Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA) of the
      United States and Canada;

   d) State and Local Governments – Audit and Accounting Guide, an industry
      guide published by the American Institute of Certified Public Accounts
      (AICPA); and



                                    Page 22
                                         Principles of Sound Financial Management
                                                            Prince William County

   e) Government Accounting Standards, issued by the Comptroller General of
      the United States.

8.09 The County will establish and maintain a Joint Audit Committee to govern
and provide oversight of the County’s and School Board’s annual external
audit. The Joint Audit Committee will coordinate activities between the Board
of County Supervisors, School Board, and the independent external auditor(s)
in connection with the performance and results of the annual comprehensive
financial audit of the County and its related component units.




                                   Page 23
                                              Principles of Sound Financial Management
                                                                 Prince William County


                                    Policy IX
                               Risk Management

Risk Management functions to protect and preserve the physical and human
resources of the County for the successful continuation of operations to successfully
provide programs and services to carry out the County’s goals and objectives. Risk
Management entails identifying inherent risks (Risk Identification), implementing
preventative measures to eliminate, control or otherwise mitigate the risk(s) (Risk
Control), and when losses do occur, determining the best method to finance the
losses (Risk Financing).

9.01 The County will manage its risk and limit risk exposure in a professional
and prudent manner.

9.02 The County shall make diligent efforts to protect and preserve County
assets against losses that could deplete County resources or impair the
County's ability to provide programs and services. The County shall reduce its
exposure to liability through training, safety, risk financing and the transfer of
risk when cost effective.

9.03 The County shall manage its exposure to risk through the most
appropriate means of self-insurance and, or the purchase of traditional
insurance to include, but not limited to, the following areas:

       a) General liability;

       b) Automobile liability;

       c) Public officials’ errors and omissions;

       d) Police professional liability;

       e) Property loss and workers’ compensation;

       f) Environmental liability;

       g) Cyber security liability; and




                                      Page 24
                                         Principles of Sound Financial Management
                                                            Prince William County

      h) Terrorism liability.

9.04 The County will further control its exposure to risk using hold harmless
agreements in County contracts, employing stop-loss limits, and by requiring
contractors doing business with the County to carry appropriate levels of
liability insurance.




                                   Page 25
                                            Principles of Sound Financial Management
                                                               Prince William County


                                Policy X
                              Procurement

The purpose of the procurement function is to obtain competitive prices for goods
and services while delivering the best value for the County. A robust procurement
strategy can help the County gain better visibility into its spending and identify
areas where savings can be achieved. The strategy to acquire goods and services
must adhere with applicable laws and regulations governing the procurement
process.

10.01 The Chief Procurement Officer will maintain an effective and efficient
purchasing system to provide needed goods and services in a timely manner
to avoid interruptions in the delivery of programs and services.

10.02 The County will endeavor to obtain goods and services as economically,
effectively, and efficiently as possible.

10.03 The County will establish procurement regulations adopted by the
Board of County Supervisors and consistent with all applicable State and
Federal laws. All goods and services will be procured in compliance with the
Virginia Public Procurement Act as defined in § 2.2-4300 through § 2.2-4377 of
the Code of Virginia.




                                     Page 26
                                              Principles of Sound Financial Management
                                                                 Prince William County


                              Policy XI
                        Economic Development

The County's economic base is an important element of and has a dramatic
influence on the County's financial health in determining the County's quality of life
and credit rating. The goal of economic development is to improve the County’s
economic base by encouraging new businesses to locate in Prince William County,
retaining existing businesses, and facilitating the expansion of businesses.

11.01 The County shall continue to expand and diversify its economic base by
attracting industrial and commercial businesses to the County. Special
emphasis should be given to targeted industries and industrial and
commercial enterprises that will employ the local labor force. The attraction of
such business and industry will be consistent with the long-term vision, goals,
and objectives defined by the County’s Comprehensive and Strategic Plans.

11.02 The County will endeavor to utilize a network of public facilities that link
planned industrial and commercial areas with its growing residential areas.

11.03 The County will endeavor to increase, to the greatest degree possible,
its commercial/industrial tax base and at place professional employment
within the County.

11.04 The County will perform a due diligence analysis of each economic
development investment to evaluate the level of each type of risk associated
with the economic development investment. The due diligence evaluation
shall be presented to the Board of County Supervisors along with the
economic development investment.

11.05 The County will perform a fiscal impact analysis on each economic
development investment that evaluates the economic costs, economic
benefits, intrinsic benefits and the levels of each type of risk associated with
the economic development investment.

11.06 The County shall maintain and comply with the written Economic
Development Land Bank Policies as approved and adopted by the Board of
County Supervisors whenever contemplating the purchase of land for
economic development purposes.



                                       Page 27
                                         Principles of Sound Financial Management
                                                            Prince William County



11.07 The County shall maintain and comply with the written Policy Guidelines
for Approval of the Creation of a Community Development Authority (CDA) as
approved and adopted by the Board of County Supervisors whenever
contemplating the creation of a separate legal CDA to further the economic
development or community development growth goals of the County.




                                   Page 28
                                          Principles of Sound Financial Management
                                                             Prince William County




                               Policy XII
                             Policy Review

12.01 The Board of County Supervisors (BOCS) will review and approve by
resolution the financial policies contained in this document a minimum of
once every four (4) years, contiguous with the term of the newly elected BOCS.
The Chief Financial Officer/Director of Finance shall review the Principles of
Sound Financial Management on an annual basis to determine if the financial
policies require update by the Board of County Supervisors in advance of the
scheduled four-year cycle.

12.02 The County Executive shall provide the Board of County Supervisors a
written status report concerning Prince William County's compliance with the
Principles of Sound Financial Management on an annual basis.




                                   Page 29
                                                                         Glossary
                                                             Prince William County

                                 Glossary


Ad Valorem Tax. A tax calculated "according to the value" of property. Such
a tax is based on the assessed valuation of real property and, in certain cases,
on a valuation of tangible personal property. (The principles define measuring
value.) The tax is a lien on the property enforceable by seizure and sale of the
property. General restrictions, such as overall restrictions on rates, or the
percent of charge allowed, apply.

Annual Debt Service Expenditures. Annual debt service for measuring debt
capacity for the County shall include debt service on outstanding:

   •   General Obligation Bonds of the County;
   •   Literary Fund Loan notes;
   •   Bonds issued to the Virginia Public School Authority, Industrial
       Development Authority, and the Virginia Resources Authority; and
   •   All annual appropriation debt to the extent that it is supported by tax
       revenue, excluding Revenue Bonds.

Annual Expenditures. Annual expenditures for measuring debt capacity
shall include the expenditures of the General Fund and the Fire & Rescue Levy
Fund.

Annual Revenue. Annual revenue for measuring debt capacity shall include
the revenues of the General Fund and special revenue funds for the fiscal year
in which the debt service expenditures occur.

Arbitrage. The gain which may be obtained by borrowing funds at a lower
(often tax-exempt) rate and investing the proceeds at higher (often taxable)
rates.

Assessed Valuation. The appraised worth of property as set by a taxing
authority through assessments for purposes of ad valorem taxation. The
method of establishing assessed valuation varies from state to state, with the
method generally specified by State law. For example, in certain jurisdictions
the assessed evaluation is equal to the full or market value of the property; in
other jurisdictions the assessed valuation is equal to a percentage of the full
market value.


                                    Page 30
                                                                         Glossary
                                                             Prince William County


Bond. A security that represents an obligation to pay a specified amount of
money on a specific date in the future, typically with periodic principal and
interest payments.

Bond Anticipation Note (BAN). Short-term interest-bearing security issued
in anticipation of a long-term bond issue. The investors typically rely upon the
sale of a subsequent issue of securities to pay the BAN at maturity.

Capital Improvement Program. The Capital Improvement Program (CIP) is
a six-year plan of major, nonrecurring facility and infrastructure expenditures
that expand or improve the County’s physical assets. Projects shown in the CIP
include physical descriptions, implementation schedules, cost and funding
source estimates, statements of relationship to the Strategic Plan and
Comprehensive Plan, and projected benefits to the community in terms of
service delivery.

Coefficient of Dispersion. The average deviation of a group of numbers from
the median expressed as a percentage of the median. In ratio studies, the
average percentage deviation from the median ratio. This is a measure of the
dispersion of a group of measurements relative to the median (center point)
of that group. This statistic is used as a measure of the dispersion or variation
in a distribution.

Committed Fund Balance. Amounts earmarked for specific purposes
pursuant to constraints imposed by formal action of the County’s governing
body.

Continuing Disclosure.        The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)
requires dissemination to interested parties of the County’s annual financial
statements. They also require that interested parties should be immediately
notified of any material event (or events or information deemed material) that
affects the County's ability to make payments to bondholders in accordance
with SEC Rule 15c2-12.

Debt Service.    The amount necessary to pay principal and interest
requirements on outstanding obligations for a given year or series of years.




                                     Page 31
                                                                        Glossary
                                                            Prince William County

Debt Service Reserve. The account into which funds are placed to pay debt
service if pledged revenues are insufficient to satisfy the debt service
requirements. A typical reserve requirement might be the maximum
aggregate annual debt service requirement for any year remaining until the
bonds reach maturity.

Fund Balance. A measurement of the net financial resources available to
finance the government.

General Obligation Debt. Debt that is secured by a pledge of the ad valorem
taxing power of the issuer. Also known as a full faith and credit obligation.

Lease. An obligation wherein a lessee agrees to make payments to a lessor in
exchange for the use of certain property. The term may refer to a capital lease
or to an operating lease.

Pension Obligation Bond. A bond issued to pay an obligation to the pension
fund or system in which its employees or others are members.

Revenue Anticipation Note. A short-term bond issued to finance a project,
with the expectation that the project's future revenue will pay back the
bondholders.

Revenue Bonds. Bonds on which the debt service is payable from the revenue
generated from the operation of the project being financed or from a category
of facilities, or from other non-tax sources of the County.

Tax Anticipation Note. A debt security issued to raise money for current
operations or capital projects before tax revenues are received. TANs are a
type of municipal bond where the bond proceeds are secured by future tax
revenue.

Tax Supported Bonds. Bonds for which the funding used to make annual debt
service expenditures are derived from tax revenue of the County’s General
and Special Revenue Funds.

Total Bonded Debt. For purposes of measuring debt capacity, total bonded
debt shall include total outstanding principal for:




                                    Page 32
                                                                        Glossary
                                                            Prince William County

   •   General Obligation Bonds of the County;
   •   Literary Fund Loan notes;
   •   Bonds issued to the Virginia Public School Authority, Industrial
       Development Authority, and the Virginia Resources Authority; and
   •   All annual appropriation debt to the extent that it is supported by tax
       revenue, excluding Revenue Bonds.

Unassigned Fund Balance. Used as a measure of the amount of resources a
jurisdiction has available for spending, including its ability to meet special
needs and withstand financial emergencies. In these policies, unassigned fund
balance means it is neither earmarked nor reserved for other uses. It is
available for discretionary spending with approval by the Board of County
Supervisors.

Variable Rate Bond or Note. A bond or note on which the interest rate is
reset periodically. The interest rate is reset either by means of an auction or
through an index.




                                    Page 33
                      Glossary
          Prince William County




Page 34
                                       Glossary
                           Prince William County




Department of Finance
1 County Complex Court
Prince William, VA 22192
www.pwcva.gov



     Page 35
